19. 2024 Savastano — Prediction of postoperative visual acuity restoration in macula off rhegmatogenous retinal detachment using artificial intelligence [AJO International] (ref of 2024_catania_chapron)
   Maria Cristina Savastano, Emanuele Crincoli, Alfonso Savastano et al. doi 10.1016/j.ajoint.2024.100008
   To assess feasibility of automatic segmentation of OCT biomarkers of visual acuity (VA) and the possibility of prediction of postoperative VA after successful reattachment in macula off rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) eyes using artificial intelligence (AI). retrospective case control study Patients operated of pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) for macula-off non-traumatic RRD with available good quality OCT acquisitions were included. Ellipsoid zone(EZ) foveal damage and reflectivity, external limiting membrane(ELM) foveal damage, foveal flattening, outer nuclear layer(ONL) thickness and the presence of cysts and hyperreflective foci(HRFs) was assessed on preoperative OCT B scan images by both a trained segmenter and human graders. Different machine learning(ML)models were tested for detection of cases with VA>0.4 logMar at 6 months from surgery.Segmentation performance of the model was compared with ground truth segmentation provided by human graders. Postoperative VA prediction based on the segmented OCT biomarkers, preoperative VA and age was compared with actual postoperative VA to assess accuracy of the model. A total of 58 eyes of 58 patients were included. A significant difference in preoperative VA, foveal flattening, foveal EZ and ELM damage, EZ reflectivity and presence of HRF in the ONL was detected between groups(all p<0.001).The segmenter showed good agreement with human assessment in both qualitative and quantitative variables. The Optimizable Naïve Bayes model was the best performing ML model and showed an accuracy of 86.2% in detection of cases with postoperative VA>0.4 logMar. The results confirm the prognostic relevance of EZ and ELM integrity and reflectivity, foveal flattening, ONL cysts and ONL HRF in macula off RRD, and, for the first time in literature, reports feasibility of the segmentation of these factors in preoperative OCT B scan images. We also report good classification performances of Naïve Bayes models based on OCT biomarkers, preoperative VA and age in distinguishing patients that should expect a postoperative VA>0.4 logMar at 6 months from surgery.

60. 2013 Sala‐Puigdollers — EXTERNAL VALIDATION OF EXISTING FORMULAS TO PREDICT THE RISK OF DEVELOPING PROLIFERATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY [Retina] (ref of 2023_gao_wu)
   Anna Sala‐Puigdollers, Itziar Fernández, Rosa María Coco et al. pmid 23594721, doi 10.1097/iae.0b013e31828991ea
   In Brief Purpose: To externally validate the accuracy of previously published formulas for predicting proliferative vitreoretinopathy development after retinal detachment surgery. Methods: Clinical variables from consecutive retinal detachment patients (n = 1,047) were collected from the Retina 1 Project conducted in 17 Spanish and Portuguese centers. These data were used for external validation of four previously published formulas, F1 to F4. Receiver-operating characteristic curves were used to validate the quality of formulas, and measures of discrimination, precision, and calibration were calculated for each. Concordance among the formulas was determined by Cohen kappa index. Results: The areas under the receiver-operating characteristic curves were as follows: F1, 0.5809; F2, 0.5398; F3, 0.5964; and F4, 0.4617. F1 had the highest accuracy, 74.21%. Almost 19% of proliferative vitreoretinopathy cases were correctly classified by F1 compared with 13%, 15%, and 10% for F2, F3, and F4, respectively. There was moderate concordance between F2 and F3 but little between the other formulas. Conclusion: After external validation, none of the formulas were accurate enough for routine clinical use. To increase its usefulness, other factors besides the clinical ones considered here should be incorporated into future formulas for predicting risk of developing proliferative vitreoretinopathy. Data from the Retina 1 Project, a prospective multicenter study, was used for external validation of four formulas reported to predict the risk of proliferative vitreoretinopathy development after retinal detachment surgery. None of the formulas were found to be reliable enough for clinical use.

